# Internals

GGen attempts to solve the problem of G code generation in a few distinct
stages. After reading the input model, we identify the bounding box and produce
a list of z coordinates which will define our slice planes. We slice the model
along these planes, each producing a list of two-dimensional polygons. These
polygons are identified by a list of points (listed in clockwise order), along
with an "orientation," identifying whether or not the polygon should be filled
with material. These slices are then passed to the G code generation engine,
which constructs a toolpath for the outline and infill of each slice.

As in any Haskell program, execution begins with evaluation of the `main`
action, located in `Main.hs`. The program begins by parsing the input file
indicated on the command line. The STL parser can be found in `Data/STL`. The
STL parser produces a list of `Faces` (defined, along with all other geometric
primatives in `GGen/Geometry/Types.hs`; the wise reader would peruse this file
before continuing).

## Geometry analysis

The main slicing code can be found in `planeSlice` defined in
`GGen/Geometry/Polygon.hs`. This code makes heavy use of various intersection
routines defined in `GGen/Geometry/Intersect.hs`. The code begins by finding a
set of line segments of intersection (with `planeFaceIntersect`) between the
slice plane and each of the faces of the model. These segments are then joined
together into continuous paths, which are in turn turned into polygons (by
`lineSegsToPolygons`).

Finally, the orientation of each of these polygons is then decided by an
intersection test. Here, a line segment is contructed from a point on the
polygon to a corner of the bounding box. The number of times this line
intersects with other polygons is then counted. The filledness of the polygon
is then inferred from the parity of this count (all of this is done by
`fillPoly` in `placeSlice`).

A type frequently seen throughout the codebase is `Intersection a`. This
represents the result of an intersection test which might return either a
primitive intersection of type `a` (e.g. Line in the case of a plane/plane
intersection), no intersection at all (e.g. parallel but not coincident
planes), or some degenerate case (e.g. two coincident planes). At the moment
the `IDegenerate` case could be considered to be ill-defined and is used to
represent both cases where the intersection is of a higher dimension than
expected (e.g. coincident planes) or lower than expected (e.g. two faces
intersecting only at a single point). Eliminating this ambiguity might be
beneficial in the future.

The plane slicing procedure is one place which could use some improvement. As
with any computational geometry problem worked in finite precision arithmetic,
the code can be very sensitive to numerical error. `planeSlice` attempts to do
several tricks to reduce the incidence of these errors, but problems can still
occur. One deficiency in the algorithm is its inability to usefully handle
faces sitting in the slice plane. Currently the `inPlane` function (defined in
`planeSlice`) is used to filter these faces out from the analysis since they
will almost certainly cause numerical issues. This, however, precludes us from
printing exterior faces in the $xy$ plane with the same 100% fill characteristic
seen in outlines without special handling (which has not yet been implemented).
The correct approach here is not clear.

## Toolpath generation

The slices and their associated polygons are now passed to the toolpath
generator (`toolpath` in `GGen/ToolPath.hs`). A `ToolPath` is characterized by
a list of `ToolMoves`, each describing a tool motion (in the $xy$ plane) along
with an extrusion quantity. Toolpath generation takes place in two phases;
first the outline of each of the polygons in the slice is drawn, followed by
the construction of the in-fill pattern. The in-fill algorithm currently used
draws a hexagonal pattern over the course of successive slices. As a result,
the infill generator must retain state between slices and therefore all slices
must be passed at once.

In order to minimize wasted tool motion, the code uses a lazy approach in
combining `ToolPaths`. The `concatToolPaths` function takes a list of
`ToolPaths` and combines them into a single toolpath, attempting to minimize
dry move distance. This is generally called as late as possible to mazimize the
potential for optimization.

## G code generation

Since a majority of the work in constructing and sequencing toolpaths has
already been done during toolpath generation, the G-code generator's
(`GGen/GCode.hs`) job is quite simple, merely mapping each `ToolMove` to the
correct G code command.

## Rendering

The `GGen.Render` module exposes a thin wrapper around the Cairo 2D drawing
library.

## A few words on numerical error

As noted above, numerical error is a persistent problem in the problem space
which GGen approaches. To properly deal with numerical error is no small task.
Strictly speaking, tolerances should be derived for each operation through
error propagation analysis. While Haskell could make this task quite
transparent, it is not clear that the benefits provided by rigorous error
analysis would outweigh the costs, both in performance and, more importantly,
complexity.

All floating point quantities in GGen are represented in
double-precision. This provides a relative error on the order of $10^-14$. Even
with propagation of errors over many operations, it is believed that error
should not exceed $10^-10$ (for small values of many; this hasn't been worked
out rigorously). Since no known machines can produce prints with anywhere near
this resolution, we take this number to be our tolerance to numerical error.
This is implemented in the `ApproxEq` typeclass. Admittedly, this approach
might sweep too many of the numerical details under the rug, so reconsideration
may be necessary in the future.
